topics-images.md, before:


[<](README.md)

<img width="300" src="assets/img/banner-images.png">

# Images: Formats, Resolutions

Learn about digital images formats and best practices

### Contents

1. [Learning Objectives](#learning-objectives)
1. [Introduction](#introduction) `5 min`
1. [Image formats](#image-formats) `5 min`
1. [How to make a screenshot](#how-to-make-a-screenshot) `5 min`
1. [Discussion](#discussion) `5 min`
1. [Keep practicing](#keep-practicing)
1. [References](#references)

### Learning Objectives

Students who complete the following will be able to:

- Describe types of digital images that computers can display and process
- List some common image types and their characteristics
- Explain what
- Demonstrate



## Introduction

Before continuing, complete the [command line crash course](topics-command-line-crash-course.md)




## Image formats

Humans are intensely visual, and it follows that our most important tool is more than capable at representing the world through pictures.

When it comes to still images, computers typically

Type | Description | File size | Example formats
--- | --- |--- |---
Raster | Also called "bitmap" - image data stored as pixels | Large | JPG, PNG, GIF
Hybrid | A binary file that contains both raster and vector data | Medium | EPS, PDF
Vector | Image rendered from list of points describing polygons | Relatively small | SVG
Character sets | 16 bit characters reference fonts or emoji stored on device  | Tiny | 👍🦄🍤


All images you see on a computer are both the data that makes up the file, as well as the rendered data rendered using a pixel display. So by the time you see the image it has been translated to pixel space.


## About videos


All videos are just a series of raster images, played in succession with an embedded sound file.


FPS | Frame Per Second
Codec |




### Common Image Formats

Extension | Name | Description
--- | --- | ---
JPG |
PNG |
GIF | Graphic Image Format |
SVG | Scalable Vector Graphic |
EPS | Encapsulated PostScript |
PDF | Portable Document Format |
PSD | Photoshop Document |




## Image Resolution

Screen resolution vs. screen resolution
Pay attention to the pixel dimensions






## How to make a screenshot

You may already know the basic command for capturing a screenshot, but these can level-up your ability to capture stills on a computer:

Screenshot type | [Mac](https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT201361) | [Windows](https://www.cnet.com/how-to/7-ways-you-can-take-screenshots-in-windows-10) [[1](https://www.howtogeek.com/226280/how-to-take-screenshots-in-windows-10/)]
--- | --- | ---
Capture entire screen | Shift + Cmd + 3 | Windows + PrtScn key
Drag to select a portion of screen | Shift + Cmd + 4 | Windows + Shift + S
Capture a single window | Shift + Cmd + 4 + Space bar | Alt + PrtScn
Cancel screenshot | Esc (Escape) | Esc (Escape)


Some recommendations for capturing videos:

Name | Cost | Platform | Comments
--- | --- | --- | ---
Quicktime | Free | Mac | Choose File > New Screen Recording
[Screenflow](http://www.telestream.net/screenflow/overview.htm) | $129 | Mac | Amazing tool and editor. Can capture computer audio too.
? | ? | Windows



## Discussion

In your group, discuss the following.

- Q1
- Q2
- Q3

## Keep practicing



## References

Commit message:

Moves learning objectives, preparation into summaries

topics-images.md, after:


[<](README.md)

<img width="300" src="assets/img/banner-images.png">

# Images: Formats, Resolutions

Learn about digital images formats and best practices

### Contents

1. [Introduction](#introduction)
1. [Image formats](#image-formats) `5 min`
1. [How to make a screenshot](#how-to-make-a-screenshot) `5 min`
1. [Discussion](#discussion) `5 min`
1. [Keep practicing](#keep-practicing)
1. [References](#references)

## Introduction

Review the following sections and perform the activities on your own or with your group.

<details>
<summary>Learning Objectives</summary>

Students who complete the following will be able to:

- Describe types of digital images that computers can display and process
- List some common image types and their characteristics
- Explain ...
- Demonstrate ...

</details>

<details>
<summary>Preparation</summary>

Complete the following to prepare for this module

- [Command Line Crash Course](topics-command-line-crash-course.md)

</details>



## Image formats

Humans are intensely visual, and it follows that our most important tool is more than capable at representing the world through pictures.

When it comes to still images, computers typically

Type | Description | File size | Example formats
--- | --- |--- |---
Raster | Also called "bitmap" - image data stored as pixels | Large | JPG, PNG, GIF
Hybrid | A binary file that contains both raster and vector data | Medium | EPS, PDF
Vector | Image rendered from list of points describing polygons | Relatively small | SVG
Character sets | 16 bit characters reference fonts or emoji stored on device  | Tiny | 👍🦄🍤


All images you see on a computer are both the data that makes up the file, as well as the rendered data rendered using a pixel display. So by the time you see the image it has been translated to pixel space.


## About videos


All videos are just a series of raster images, played in succession with an embedded sound file.


FPS | Frame Per Second
Codec |




### Common Image Formats

Extension | Name | Description
--- | --- | ---
JPG |
PNG |
GIF | Graphic Image Format |
SVG | Scalable Vector Graphic |
EPS | Encapsulated PostScript |
PDF | Portable Document Format |
PSD | Photoshop Document |




## Image Resolution

Screen resolution vs. screen resolution
Pay attention to the pixel dimensions






## How to make a screenshot

You may already know the basic command for capturing a screenshot, but these can level-up your ability to capture stills on a computer:

Screenshot type | [Mac](https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT201361) | [Windows](https://www.cnet.com/how-to/7-ways-you-can-take-screenshots-in-windows-10) [[1](https://www.howtogeek.com/226280/how-to-take-screenshots-in-windows-10/)]
--- | --- | ---
Capture entire screen | Shift + Cmd + 3 | Windows + PrtScn key
Drag to select a portion of screen | Shift + Cmd + 4 | Windows + Shift + S
Capture a single window | Shift + Cmd + 4 + Space bar | Alt + PrtScn
Cancel screenshot | Esc (Escape) | Esc (Escape)


Some recommendations for capturing videos:

Name | Cost | Platform | Comments
--- | --- | --- | ---
Quicktime | Free | Mac | Choose File > New Screen Recording
[Screenflow](http://www.telestream.net/screenflow/overview.htm) | $129 | Mac | Amazing tool and editor. Can capture computer audio too.
? | ? | Windows



## Discussion

In your group, discuss the following.

- Q1
- Q2
- Q3

## Keep practicing



## References
