topics-files-naming-conventions.md, before:


[<](README.md)

<img width="300" src="assets/img/banner-files-naming-conventions.png">

# File organization and naming conventions

Learn about all the files on your computer!

### Contents

1. [Learning Objectives](#learning-objectives)
1. [Introduction](#introduction) `5 min`
1. [File naming conventions](#file-naming-conventions) `5 min`
1. [Discussion](#discussion) `5 min`
1. [Keep practicing](#keep-practicing)
1. [References](#references)

### Learning Objectives

Students who complete the following will be able to:

- Describe
- List
- Explain
- Demonstrate best practices for naming and organizing files and folders






## Introduction

Complete the [command line crash course](topics-command-line-crash-course.md) and then review and perform the activities with your group.







## File naming conventions

Do you ever have trouble finding or identifying files?

- Share your current file naming convention in your group. What currently is working for you and what is not?
- Can you find examples on your computer of good and bad uses of file naming conventions? Screenshot them and share. It's OK, we've all been there. 🤗

While operating systems are constantly changing how they organize their files, often obscuring the users' access to files with abstractions, if you name your files with a bit of forethought you'll find you can identify them much faster.


### Best Naming Practices

Tips for how to choose the text you use to name your files, folders, even code...

- **Use descriptive names**: Perhaps the most important tip. Do yourself a favor and name files, folders, code, etc., as if a complete stranger (you!) will see it in the future. Don't use `untitled`, `stuff`, `new` in your names.
- **Avoid abbreviations**: How will "future you" remember that `design-1-rtrbith.png` is the design variation where you *"removed the red box in the header"*? This would work better `design-1-red-header-removed.png`
- **Append version numbers and/or dates**: When iterating, don't append the relative term, `new`, to your files. Use an actual version number like `design-v6.psd` or the date `paper-draft2-20210501.psd` so that you know exactly what the file is *AND* your OS will organize the files appropriately.



### Everything is case-sensitive on the internet

When you name ***any*** file or folder that could potentially be viewed in a web browser (e.g. web pages, PDFs, images, javascript, css, folders, and many others) it is essential to:

<img src="assets/img/files-naming-conventions.png">

- Do not use spaces in your filenames: Replace with hyphens, underscores, or camelCase.
- Use a [naming convention](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Naming_convention_(programming)), so you don't have to think when you type your code. Look for an established convention
- **Best practice**: Only use lowercase names with no spaces.


### Popular naming conventions

A table showing common file naming conventions for files, folders, variables, etc. to remove spaces or symbols between words.

Convention | Where common | Examples | Notes
--- | --- | --- | ---
Pascalcase | C# | `UserAccount` | Words are delimited by capital letters
Camelcase | Javascript, CSS | `userAccount` | Words are delimited by capital letters, except the initial word
Snakecase | [Python](https://medium.com/@dasagrivamanu/python-naming-conventions-the-10-points-you-should-know-149a9aa9f8c7), [R](https://style.tidyverse.org/) | `user_account` | Words are delimited by an underscore
Kebabcase |  | `user-account` | Words are delimited by hyphens
Screamingcase |  | `USER_ACCOUNT` | Words are all caps, and or delimited by an underscore







## Discussion

How would you name and organize each of these files:

1. Draft 3 of your Microsoft Word document containing your essay "World War II's Influence on Modern Art in the 1950's"
1. A PDF of the above document that you plan to share on a website.
1. A document containing research you collected while writing the document.






<img src="assets/img/files-naming-bad.png"> <img src="assets/img/files-naming-better.png"><br>
<sub>It is always a good practice to iterate, whether you are working on a concept, a design, or a paper.
But, name your files with forethought and organization in mind. Left: 😢 no convention in use, names are not descriptive; Right: 🙌 names follow similar convention, include descriptions, iterations, and versions</sub>

<img src="assets/img/files-folder-naming.png"> <img src="assets/img/files-folder-naming-layers.png">





## Keep practicing





## References

- [What is the difference between binary and text files?](https://fileinfo.com/help/binary_vs_text_files)
- [Binary files](http://statmath.wu.ac.at/courses/data-analysis/itdtHTML/node58.html)
- [What Is A File Extension?](https://www.howtogeek.com/356448/what-is-a-file-extension/)
- [Top 10 Unity best practices: Naming Conventions](https://www.reddit.com/r/gamedev/comments/3a1k33/top_10_unity_best_practices_naming_conventions/)
- [Devopedia: Naming Conventions](https://devopedia.org/naming-conventions)

Commit message:

Moves learning objectives, preparation into summaries

topics-files-naming-conventions.md, after:


[<](README.md)

<img width="300" src="assets/img/banner-files-naming-conventions.png">

# File organization and naming conventions

Learn about all the files on your computer!

### Contents

1. [Introduction](#introduction)
1. [File naming conventions](#file-naming-conventions) `5 min`
1. [Discussion](#discussion) `5 min`
1. [Keep practicing](#keep-practicing)
1. [References](#references)

## Introduction

Review the following sections and perform the activities on your own or with your group.

<details>
<summary>Learning Objectives</summary>

Students who complete the following will be able to:

- Describe ...
- List ...
- Explain ...
-Demonstrate best practices for naming and organizing files and folders

</details>

<details>
<summary>Preparation</summary>

Complete the following to prepare for this module

- [Command Line Crash Course](topics-command-line-crash-course.md)

</details>





## File naming conventions

Do you ever have trouble finding or identifying files?

- Share your current file naming convention in your group. What currently is working for you and what is not?
- Can you find examples on your computer of good and bad uses of file naming conventions? Screenshot them and share. It's OK, we've all been there. 🤗

While operating systems are constantly changing how they organize their files, often obscuring the users' access to files with abstractions, if you name your files with a bit of forethought you'll find you can identify them much faster.


### Best Naming Practices

Tips for how to choose the text you use to name your files, folders, even code...

- **Use descriptive names**: Perhaps the most important tip. Do yourself a favor and name files, folders, code, etc., as if a complete stranger (you!) will see it in the future. Don't use `untitled`, `stuff`, `new` in your names.
- **Avoid abbreviations**: How will "future you" remember that `design-1-rtrbith.png` is the design variation where you *"removed the red box in the header"*? This would work better `design-1-red-header-removed.png`
- **Append version numbers and/or dates**: When iterating, don't append the relative term, `new`, to your files. Use an actual version number like `design-v6.psd` or the date `paper-draft2-20210501.psd` so that you know exactly what the file is *AND* your OS will organize the files appropriately.



### Everything is case-sensitive on the internet

When you name ***any*** file or folder that could potentially be viewed in a web browser (e.g. web pages, PDFs, images, javascript, css, folders, and many others) it is essential to:

<img src="assets/img/files-naming-conventions.png">

- Do not use spaces in your filenames: Replace with hyphens, underscores, or camelCase.
- Use a [naming convention](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Naming_convention_(programming)), so you don't have to think when you type your code. Look for an established convention
- **Best practice**: Only use lowercase names with no spaces.


### Popular naming conventions

A table showing common file naming conventions for files, folders, variables, etc. to remove spaces or symbols between words.

Convention | Where common | Examples | Notes
--- | --- | --- | ---
Pascalcase | C# | `UserAccount` | Words are delimited by capital letters
Camelcase | Javascript, CSS | `userAccount` | Words are delimited by capital letters, except the initial word
Snakecase | [Python](https://medium.com/@dasagrivamanu/python-naming-conventions-the-10-points-you-should-know-149a9aa9f8c7), [R](https://style.tidyverse.org/) | `user_account` | Words are delimited by an underscore
Kebabcase |  | `user-account` | Words are delimited by hyphens
Screamingcase |  | `USER_ACCOUNT` | Words are all caps, and or delimited by an underscore







## Discussion

How would you name and organize each of these files:

1. Draft 3 of your Microsoft Word document containing your essay "World War II's Influence on Modern Art in the 1950's"
1. A PDF of the above document that you plan to share on a website.
1. A document containing research you collected while writing the document.






<img src="assets/img/files-naming-bad.png"> <img src="assets/img/files-naming-better.png"><br>
<sub>It is always a good practice to iterate, whether you are working on a concept, a design, or a paper.
But, name your files with forethought and organization in mind. Left: 😢 no convention in use, names are not descriptive; Right: 🙌 names follow similar convention, include descriptions, iterations, and versions</sub>

<img src="assets/img/files-folder-naming.png"> <img src="assets/img/files-folder-naming-layers.png">





## Keep practicing





## References

- [What is the difference between binary and text files?](https://fileinfo.com/help/binary_vs_text_files)
- [Binary files](http://statmath.wu.ac.at/courses/data-analysis/itdtHTML/node58.html)
- [What Is A File Extension?](https://www.howtogeek.com/356448/what-is-a-file-extension/)
- [Top 10 Unity best practices: Naming Conventions](https://www.reddit.com/r/gamedev/comments/3a1k33/top_10_unity_best_practices_naming_conventions/)
- [Devopedia: Naming Conventions](https://devopedia.org/naming-conventions)
